Most of you probably know Steve Harvey as the host of the TV
show Family Feud.But I was first exposed to Steve Harvey,
the stand-up comedian. I remember my dad had a DVD of the
Kings of Comedy Tour with Steve, Bernie Mac, Cedric the
Entertainer, and D.L. Hughley. Steve also had his own TV
show and has starred in a few movies as well. But what a lot
of people don't know is that Steve comes from very humble
beginnings. He didn't start his career as an entertainer
until he was almost 30 years old, an age at which most
people considered their lives over and their opportunities
missed. So in this episode, I'm going to share a short clip
of Steve giving some advice to young people out there who
dream of achieving great things in life. Let's get started.
Alright
y'all, as always, I'm going to play the entire clip from
start to finish and then we'll go back and analyze
everything that was said so you can learn more vocabulary
and understand natives better. So let's do it.
Steve Harvey:
"Don't be afraid to reinvent yourself and don't be afraid to
be different, man. You ain't got to fit in the crowd. I tell
my sons all the time, "Why are you following everybody when
you were clearly meant to lead?" It's always better to just
do your thing. And I don't care what situation you done got
your life in. You can turn your life around cos it ain't
never too late. See, I didn't get into comedy til I was 27.
I was homeless from 30 to 33. I lived in a 1976 Tempo. I
lived in a car for three years, man. And so people see me
today, they don't know where I come from. And I tell young
cats all the time, man, the key is you can't ever give up."
Alright my friends, now, like I usually say...or as I
usually say, let me speak grammatically correct - as I
usually say, don't feel bad if you couldn't understand
everything in that clip and there are...and just know that
there are a bunch of reasons that you might not have
understood everything in that clip. It could be somebody's
accent. It could be their word choice, the dialect, so don't
feel bad. We're going to break it down or analyze it in
detail right now. So let's go back and I got the transcript
of his words in front of me so I'm gonna kind of play a
little bit, then explain a little bit, and play some more,
and explain a little more until we reach the end of the
clip. All right, my friend. So let's do it. The first
sentence...
"Don't be afraid to reinvent yourself. And don't be afraid
to be different, man."
So the word I want to explain in this sentence is
"reinvent". When he says, don't be afraid to "reinvent"
yourself. What he's saying is, don't be afraid to change the
direction of your life, because to reinvent oneself means to
take up a very different job or take up a very different way
of life. And when I say "take up", I mean "adapt", you know,
adapt a new way of life or choose a new way of life. Right?
So that's what it means to reinvent yourself. Maybe today
you're an accountant or you're studying accounting at
university and you've reached the end of your degree and you
realize, I don't want to do this shit. Don't be afraid to
reinvent yourself. Don't be afraid to choose a completely
different career, life, path, profession, whatever it is.
Don't be afraid to do that. You are in control of your life,
so you control the direction in which you and thus your life
end up going. I think that's what he was trying to say.
Alright, so don't be afraid to reinvent yourself. Let's
continue.
"You ain't got to fit in the crowd.
I tell my sons all the time, 'Why are you following
everybody when you were clearly meant to lead?'"
Alright. There's a few things I want to explain from those
three sentences, so let me go back. The first thing, "You
ain't got to fit in the crowd." There's a couple of things I
want to explain in that sentence. The first one is "ain't
got" another word "ain't" is confusing for a lot of people
'cos it means so many different things. And some people say
it's correct, other people say it's incorrect, and all these
things. For now, I'm just going to explain this word in the
current context. So when he says "You ain't got to fit in
the crowd", what he's saying is "You don't have to fit in
the crowd.", which is another way of saying, "You are not
obligated to fit in the crowd." It's all the same. You are
not obligated. You do not have to. You ain't got to. Three
different ways of saying the same thing, right? So the next
thing is "fit in". You might be asking yourself, what does
that mean? And to fit in, it means to feel that you belong
to a particular group and you are accepted by that group. So
if you want to fit in with the gamers, you might try to play
video games and listen to gaming podcasts so you can talk
about gaming with the gamers. You might try to talk like
them and dress like them and look like them so they accept
you. You want to fit in, right? You want to belong to this
group. If you don't fit in, that means they don't accept
you. They don't accept you as one of them. They see you as
different or "other". "You don't embody our culture or way
of life," or whatever it is. You don't fit in, right? That's
the idea. So you ain't got to fit in. You do not have to fit
in. You do not have to try to be like other people just to
be accepted by them. That's the idea. You ain't got to fit
in the crowd. And that's the last word I wanted to explain
from that sentence. Crowd. C-r-o-w-d.
A crowd is just a large group of people. But we use this
word a little figuratively, let's say, to just refer to
people in general. You don't have to fit in the crowd means
you don't have to do or be like or look like or talk like or
act like the majority of people in society, or the majority
of people around you, right? So that's the idea. Don't be
afraid to reinvent yourself and just remember, you don't
have to fit in the crowd or you ain't got to fit in the
crowd. Alright?
So the next sentence, "I tell my sons all the time", let me
play that one more time.
"I tell my sons all the time."
"I tell my sons all the time." What I wanted to highlight in
this sentence is the way he pronounced "all the time". Three
separate words, but he said it as if it were one word. He
connected those words, right? He said "all 'a time", I tell
my sons "all 'a time". "All 'a time". This is a really,
really, really common connection of words in the English
language, at least in the United States. "All 'a people",
"all 'a money", "all 'a problems", "all 'a girls", "all 'a
trees", "all 'a time". "All 'a..." It's just a really common
way just...
You see those specific words being connected all the time in
casual speech. So if this is the first time you've heard it
or somebody called it to your attention, just remember to
pay a little bit more attention and start to notice the
patterns of which words are being connected in our speech.
Because a lot of people know about connected speech in
English. They know we connect our words all the time. And
for that reason, it's really hard to understand some
natives. But if you pay attention to which words are being
connected on a regular basis, you might come to understand
natives more easily, because, you know, these words
specifically sound like this when they're connected. So when
I hear that, I not only understand the idea, but I know what
words are being said. Hopefully that makes sense. If it
doesn't, send me a message or something and let me know, but
I'm going to continue the episode. So I talked about
reinventing yourself and how you don't have to, or you ain't
got to fit in the crowd. And Steve was basically saying he
tells his sons this all the time. So let's continue.
"Why are you following everybody when you were clearly meant
to lead?"
Okay. Three things I want to point out in this sentence. The
first one is the pronunciation of a couple of words. He
said, "Why are you following everybody when you were clearly
meant to lead?" But notice how he pronounced the words
"following" and "everybody", let me play it one more time.
"Why are you following everybody when you were clearly meant
to lead?"
So hopefully you could hear he said it a little bit
differently than I did. He said, "Why are you following
everybody?" He didn't say, "Why are you following
everybody?" Completely different pronunciation. And it's
just, again, it's hard to explain why he does that. I really
don't know why he does that. But, you know, it's just a
different accent. It's a different dialect and way of
speaking. So "why are you following everybody?" Again, I
guess the point I'm trying to make is that you need to pay
more attention to which words or which letters and words are
being pronounced in certain ways. "Following", "i-n-g".
Words like that in informal speech are typically pronounced
in a certain way. Why are you "following"? Why are you
"talking"? Why are you "shooting"? Why are you "speaking"?
Why are you "eating"? All of these words end in "i-n-g", but
not...not pronouncing them in what is known as the standard
way of pronouncing them, right? So I just wanted to call
that to your attention. The same thing with the word
"everybody". A lot of people, depending on where you're from
and what your culture is and you know, what kind of English
you speak, a lot of people don't say "everybody", they say
"errbody". "I know errbody." "I love errbody, man." "What's
up, errbody?" I say that basically every episode. "What's
up, errbody? You are listening to another episode of Life in
English." I don't say "everybody", I say "errbody". It's
faster, it's easier, you know? And that's just how we talk
where I'm from. So when you hear that, hopefully now you'll
recognize, and maybe you already recognize, that we're
saying "everybody". And I want to make it clear that you
don't have to speak this way. It's...the point here is that
you understand what's being said no matter who's talking.
You can talk how you want to talk, but you don't have to
talk like other people. It's important to understand them,
though, okay? So that's the point. So he said, "Why are you
following everybody when you were clearly meant to lead?"
And that's the last thing I wanted to explain. To be "meant
to do something". It's the same thing as being intended or
destined to do something. So if you are meant to lead, it
means you are intended to lead; you are destined to be a
leader. That is your destiny. You were born to do this
thing. That's your purpose. If you're meant to be a painter,
your purpose in life is to be a painter. You were born to do
that, right? If you're meant to be a teacher, same thing.
Hopefully you get the idea. It's a...it's not the most
casual way of speaking. I mean, you could say it's slightly
a formal thing to say "you were meant to lead", but it's
normal. Everybody understands and uses that word. I just
wanted to make sure you understood what it meant, alright?
So let's keep going.
"It's always better to just do your thing."
"It's always better to just do your thing." I'm sure you
understood that but what I wanted to bring to your attention
is the phrase "Do your thing." It's a really common phrase
in English and all it means...it's to do what you normally
do. To do things in your way without worrying about what
other people think or say. And you could use this in any
situation, any context, formal or informal. It does not
matter. It just means do what you normally do. Be yourself.
Do things in your way. Do your thing, you know? So maybe you
got kids and they're nervous about the performance this
weekend. Maybe they play saxophone and they've got a
performance this weekend and they're telling you that
they're really nervous, they don't know what to do, it's
making them anxious. You can say, "Relax. You've been
practicing all year. You got this!
Do your thing. Just do your thing, man!" It means just do
what you normally do. You're already talented. You're
already good. Don't put too much pressure on yourself. Just
go up there and do your thing. Do what you always do. Do
your thing, alright? Cool.
So it's always better to just do your thing. It's always
better to be yourself and walk your own path. You don't have
to fit in the crowd. You don't have to be like everyone
else. That's the idea here. Okay, so let's keep going.
"It's always better to just do your thing. And I don't care
what situation you done got your life in. You can turn your
life around cos it ain't never too late."
Alright. There's a lot there. He said, "I don't care what
situation you done got your life in." So there's a quick
grammar observation I want to bring to your attention in
regards to this sentence. He said, "I don't care what
situation you done got your life in." "Done got" This is
umm...How can I explain this to you?
It's just a different dialect of English, but in standard
plain English, another way of saying the same thing is "I
don't care what situation you have gotten your life in." So
in this case, the word "done" is functioning like the word
"have". "I don't care what situation you have gotten
yourself into" or "you done got yourself into." It's the
same thing. So if you're asking, is that standard correct
English? Technically it's not. You shouldn't write that way
in emails or at work or if you're trying to pass an exam.
But umm...a lot of people here do say it, at least where I'm
from, you know. So you could say "I done been all over the
world." It's the same thing as saying "I have been all over
the world." "I done seen a lot of people this week." "I have
seen a lot of people this week." It's a very informal
dialect of English that I would imagine everyone here
understands, but not everyone uses, you know? I just wanted
you to understand what was being said, but it's really,
really common in certain dialects of English, you know? So,
"done got your life in" is the same thing as "have got your
life into." And an even more formal way of saying that is,
"I don't care what situation into which you have got your
life," but nobody really talks like that. I talked like that
sometimes on the podcast because I want to sound fancy, but
in casual speech we don't talk like that. Alright? So "I
don't care what situation you done got your life in" or you
have got your life in, "you can turn your life around." What
does that mean "to turn your life around"? It simply means
to change your life completely from bad to good. Because
typically we move in a particular direction, so if your life
is going in the wrong direction, if you're...if you're on a
bad path, if things are getting worse and worse and worse,
and you eventually hit rock bottom, which means you hit the
worst point you could possibly hit, the bottom of the
barrel, the darkest place you could think of, you can still
turn your life around 180 degrees and go in the other
direction. You can still do that. You can turn your life
around, go from good to bad, right? Instead of going down,
go up, make progress. That's the idea, okay? So you can turn
your life around cos "it ain't never too late." That was the
last thing he said. You can turn your life around because
"It ain't never too late." So when he says "it ain't ever
too late," we find ourselves trying to understand this
fucking word "ain't", right? It ain't never too late. So
again, I'm just going to explain the meaning in this context
when I say "It ain't ever too late." It's the same thing as
saying "It is not ever too late." Alright? You can always
turn your life around cos it's never too late. That's
standard English, and it's the same thing. So, hopefully
you're still with me. Hopefully, you're getting the idea,
and let's continue.
"See, I didn't get into comedy til I was 27. I was homeless
from 30 to 33. I lived in a 1976 Tempo. I lived in a car for
three years, man. And so people see me today, they don't
know where I come from. And I tell young cats all the time,
man, the key is you can't ever give up."
Okay. So I played those last few sentences together because
there's only a few things I want to explain. The first one
is "get into". Steve said, "I didn't get into comedy until I
was 27." To "get into something" basically means to become
involved in something or to start practicing something. So
if I get into acting at ten, I start acting or I start
getting involved in the industry at ten, or maybe I get into
cooking or I get into learning languages or I get into
music, whatever it is, just to become involved or interested
in or start practicing this thing. That's what it means to
"get into something" in this context. There are other
meanings in other contexts, but I'm not going to confuse
you, okay? So "I didn't get into comedy until I was 27. I
was homeless from 30 to 33." Just in case you don't know,
"homeless" just means you don't have a home, right? You are
without a home. You live on a street or something like that.
A homeless person is somebody who does not have a home and
they live on the street. So Steve is saying, from 30 to 33,
he was homeless. And I just want to point out really quickly
this sentence structure "from 30 to 33". A lot of times we
use that, you know, when we're referencing periods of time
or distance - I work from 9 a.m.
to 5 p.m.
I can go from Los Angeles to New York tomorrow night or
something like that. From this point to that point, this
destination to that one. At this point in time to that one.
Alright? It's really, really common. So practice that one,
alright? Cool.
Where did we stop?
"I lived in a 1976 Tempo", which is just in case you're
wondering, a 1976 Tempo is a car. And you...that becomes
clear in the next sentence. He says, "I lived in a car for
three years", right? "So people see me today, they don't
know where I come from." "They don't know where I started."
"They don't know about my origin." Right? "And I tell young
cats all the time, the key is you can't ever give up." So he
says, "young cats", he's not talking about the animal. Just
in case you were wondering, the word "cat" is like...it's
American slang for a "guy". "I was talking to this cat and
he said blah, blah, blah." It's the same thing as saying, "I
was talking to this guy, I was talking to this dude. I was
talking to this man, this cat." It's an older word, I think.
Not a lot of young people say "cat" these days. It's...it's
older guys like 45 and up that would typically use the word
"cat", I think. I mean, we might use it from time to time
just, for the sake of variety or being creative in our
speech. Americans do that a lot, at least where I'm from.
But the word "cat" typically, and you know how old or you
might not know...some people know, most of us know, Steve
Harvey is not a young guy anymore. He's relatively older, so
he would use that kind of word but I typically wouldn't say
"I was talking to this cat" on a regular basis.
But anyway, just, just so you know, the word "cat" is the
same is slang for the word "guy". Alright? And typically,
men use that word. I've never in my life heard a woman say
"this cat". "I was talking to this cat. Well, he's a cool
cat. I like that cat." I've never in my life heard a female
use that word, just for your information. So he says, "I
tell young cats all the time. The key is you can't ever give
up." So when he says "the key" in this case and in many
cases in English, "the key" is another way of saying "the
most important thing". Because what is a key? It's a tool
that we use to unlock things. Right? So if you think about
that, figuratively or metaphorically, let's say the key is
what's going to unlock the door so that you can enter
whatever it is. Alright? Whatever it is you're trying to get
into, you get the...you get the point. So the most important
thing is you can't ever give up. I want to play that
sentence one more time to explain or to show you a
pronunciation detail and also explain really common phrasal
verb. So let me play it one more time.
"And I tell young cats all the time, man, the key is you
can't ever give up."
"The key is you can't ever give up." Just notice how he
pronounced that word. He said "cain't". "Cain't". Sounds
like the word "ain't". And it's a small difference. This is
not extremely important for you to know or pay attention to.
It's just interesting the variety of pronunciation we have
even within one country, you know, because a lot of people
will say "can't". And when we're speaking fast, "can" and
"can't" sound very similar, for example, "I can do that."
I'm saying "I can do that", but I didn't pronounce it that
way or "I can't do that." Now I'm saying "I cannot do that."
See what I'm saying? Some people will say "I cain't." "I
can" and "I cain't". "I cain't do that." "Ain't, ain't,
ain't" is the sound. There's no right or wrong. I mean, just
depends on where you're from. I just wanted to bring that
detail to your attention because I thought it was
interesting. But anyway, "you can't ever give up." Just in
case you don't know the phrasal verb "give up", it just
means "quit". So if you "give up on your dreams", it means
you quit trying to achieve your dreams. If you "give up on
your son", it means you quit trying to parent your son. You
see? So "the key", the most important thing is that you
cannot ever quit. That's the idea.
So, I'm going to play the clip one more time without any
interruptions, pauses or explanations, and let's see how
much more you can understand, my friend. Alright, let's do
it.
"So don't be afraid to reinvent yourself. And don't be
afraid to be different, man. You ain't got to fit in the
crowd. I tell my sons all the time, "Why are you following
everybody when you were clearly meant to lead?" It's always
better to just do your thing. And I don't care what
situation you done got your life in, you can turn your life
around cos it ain't never too late. See, I didn't get into
comedy til I was 27. I was homeless from 30 to 33. I lived
in a 1976 Tempo.
I lived in a car for three years, man. And so people see me
today, they don't know where I come from. And I tell young
cats all the time, man, the key is you can't ever give up."
Alright, my friend. I really hope Steve's words have
inspired you to keep working towards your goals. And if you
don't have some goals, I strongly encourage you to create
some for yourself. And just remember, you don't lose when
you fail, you only lose when you quit.